[#3332] docs: Axon Framework 5 - Getting Started Guide (#3369)
AxonFramework/AxonFramework: docs/af5-app-from-scratch/modules/ROOT/pages/implement-command-subscribe-student.adoc

image::EventModeling_GWT_SubscribeStudent.png[]

In previous section we've defined the `CourseCreated` events, so there are two left from the specification.
Let's define them as Java records, as before.

[source,java]
.src/main/java/io/axoniq/demo/university/faculty/events/StudentSubscribed.java
----
package io.axoniq.demo.university.faculty.events;

import org.axonframework.eventsourcing.annotations.EventTag;

public record StudentEnrolledFaculty(
        @EventTag // <1>
        String studentId,
        String firstName,
        String lastName
) {

}
----

<.> Always remember about marking which properties are event tags.

[source,java]
.src/main/java/io/axoniq/demo/university/faculty/events/StudentSubscribed.java
----
package io.axoniq.demo.university.faculty.events;

import org.axonframework.eventsourcing.annotations.EventTag;

public record StudentSubscribed(
        @EventTag // <1>
        String studentId,
        @EventTag // <1>
        String courseId
) {
}
----

<.> Thanks to those annotations the event will be tagged with `studentId` and `courseId`.
It's a good example that StudentSubscribed event is connected to two business entities—Student and the Course.

> When domain experts say that "student subscribed", they know that means the course free spots decreased and also student subscription limit may be reached.

Author: I must say (with my limited English, but I think it may be also the case for other readers) it's much more difficult to understand, at least for me: `they know that it means the course as one seat less`. 
Are you sure is what you wanted :D ?

import io.axoniq.demo.university.faculty.write.StudentId;
import io.axoniq.demo.university.faculty.write.CourseId;

public record SubscribeStudent(StudentId studentId, CourseId courseId) {
}
----

== Specification by example

As you remember from the previous section, we do not focus on entities but on behavior.
So we're going to describe our feature in a Given-When-Then manner based on commands and events.
Let's create the first test case using Axon Test Fixture.

We're going to translate the Event Modeling specification, which you've seen on the top of the page plus other test cases for this slice, to the code.
We call it Test First, we don't use TDD to design our application, but we do the design on the whiteboard using Event Modeling, which is faster and much less expensive than in the code.
From Event Modeling we can derive the test cases for specific slice (functionality) and translate them directly to the code.
The Axon Framework supports the Given-When-Then convention pretty well.

NOTE: Translating Event Modeling specification to test is a repeatable task, so it can be even done automatically with the help of AI.

>  The Subscribe Student feature has several business rules which you may derive from the Event Modeling GWTs:

Author: For more clarity changed to: ` The Subscribe Student feature has several business rules which you may derive from the Event Modeling Given-When-Then specifications:`

>  The Subscribe Student feature has several business rules which you may derive from the Event Modeling GWTs:

Author: Clarified :) `Given-When-Then specifications`.

                .event(new StudentEnrolledFaculty(studentId.raw(), "Milan", "Savic"))
                .event(new CourseCreated(targetCourseId.raw(), "Programming", 10))
                .event(new CourseCreated(course1Id.raw(), "Course 1", 10))
                .event(new CourseCreated(course2Id.raw(), "Course 2", 10))
                .event(new CourseCreated(course3Id.raw(), "Course 3", 10))
                .event(new StudentSubscribed(studentId.raw(), course1Id.raw()))
                .event(new StudentSubscribed(studentId.raw(), course2Id.raw()))
                .event(new StudentSubscribed(studentId.raw(), course3Id.raw()))
                .when()
                .command(new io.axoniq.demo.university.faculty.write.subscribestudentmulti.SubscribeStudent(studentId, targetCourseId))
                .then()
                .noEvents()
                .exceptionSatisfies(thrown -> assertThat(thrown)
                        .isInstanceOf(RuntimeException.class)
                        .hasMessage("Student subscribed to too many courses")
                );
    }

}
----

These tests demonstrate the behavior we want to implement, checking both successful and error cases.

> To those tests we need to implement the command handler for `SubscribeStudent` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For these tests we need to implement the command handler for `SubscribeStudent` command.
```

        // todo: check business rules
        return List.of(new StudentSubscribed(command.studentId().raw(), command.courseId().raw()));
    }

    private static List<EventMessage<?>> toMessages(List<StudentSubscribed> events) {
        return events.stream()
                     .map(SubscribeStudentCommandHandler::toMessage)
                     .collect(Collectors.toList());
    }

    private static EventMessage<?> toMessage(Object payload) {
        return new GenericEventMessage<>(
                new MessageType(payload.getClass()),
                payload
        );
    }

    @EventSourcedEntity // <6>
    static class State {
        // todo: define state necessary to accept or reject `SubscribeStudent` command
    }

}
----

<1> For the sample simplicity, we hardcoded the maximum number of courses per student.
Each student can subscribe up to 3 courses at the same time.
<2> We use `@InjectEntity` to inject the state object.
<3> This is your domain model invocation.
You may keep it in the command handler as on the example or make the function unaware of the infrastructure like Axon Framework.

> This functional resembles the `Decider` pattern.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This function resembles the `Decider` pattern.
```

<4> As before, we translate events (which are a result of our domain function) to messages to be able to publish them.

> <5> We use `EventSink` to publish events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<5> We use the `EventSink` to publish events.
```

> <6> Before we defined `tagKey` in `@EventSourcedEntity` annotation, now we cannot do that, because we require events about every subscription of a student and every subscription to the course, so we have multiple business concepts related to a business process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<6> Before we defined a `tagKey` in `@EventSourcedEntity` annotation. Now we cannot do that, because we require events about every subscription of a student and every subscription to the course. So we have multiple business concepts related to a business process!
```

In a few paragraphs you will see how to do that with the `EventCriteria` API.

> We always need single, unique identifier to load the state, because the `@InjectEntity` annotation needs to know how to identify the entity to load.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We always need a single, unique identifier to load the state, because the `@InjectEntity` annotation needs to know how to identify the entity to load.
```

As you see there are two TODOs left in the `SubscribeStudentCommandHandler` code.
Now we need to validate business rules, there are a few of them.
The student can subscribe to course only if adhere to the domain invariants of this operation.
I will list them belong along with assertion function, and we will also see what you need in the State object to validate them.

**Rule #1: The student is enrolled in the faculty **

When a student is enrolled the faculty it has assigned `StudentId`, so we add it to the State:

[source,java]
.src/main/java/io/axoniq/demo/university/faculty/write/subscribestudent/SubscribeStudent.java
----
class SubscribeStudentCommandHandler {

    // rest omitted for brevity

    @EventSourcedEntity
    static class State {

        private StudentId studentId;

        @EventSourcingHandler
        void evolve(StudentEnrolledFaculty event) {
            this.studentId = new StudentId(event.studentId());
        }
    }

}
----

In the business rule assertion function, we throw an exception if the rule is not satisfied.

> It's another approach than presented before.

Author: Changed to:
```
This is a different approach from what we used in the `CreateCourse` feature, where we returned an empty list of events when a business rule was violated.
```

                alreadySubscribed = true;
            }
        }

        @EventSourcingHandler
        void evolve(StudentUnsubscribed event) { // <7>
            var subscribingStudentId = new StudentId(event.studentId());
            var subscribedCourseId = new CourseId(event.courseId());
            if(subscribedCourseId.equals(courseId)) {
                noOfStudentsSubscribedToCourse--;
            }
            if (subscribingStudentId.equals(studentId)) {
                noOfCoursesStudentSubscribed--;
            }
            if (subscribingStudentId.equals(studentId) && subscribedCourseId.equals(courseId)) {
                alreadySubscribed = false;
            }
        }
    }

}
----
<1> Same as with a student, we store the `courseId` if was created along with the `capacity` from the same `CourseCreated` event.
<2> We update the `capacity` on `CourseCapacityChanged` event.
<3> In this case, we're going to evolve the State on every StudentSubscribed event related to the course or the student whose IDs are in the command.
How we instruct the store to load those events, we will discuss in the next paragraph.

> For now, you need to be aware of that you may receive events about different student and different course as well, because we have one event handler per event type -> we handle there all `StudentSubscribed/Unsubscribed` for given course (different students) to know how much capacity left and all for given student (different courses) to know how many courses the student is subscribed to.

Reviewer: This sentence doesn't flow clearly, but I am not sure how to adjust it without losing your intent. Could you please break this sentence up into several smaller sentences?

<4> If the `StudentSubscribed` event is related to the course, we increase the number of students subscribed to the course.
<5> If the `StudentSubscribed` event is related to the student, we increase the number of courses the student is subscribed to.
<6> If the `StudentSubscribed` event is related to the course and the student, we set the `alreadySubscribed` flag to true.

> <7> This handler for `StudentUnsubscribed` is an exact opposite of the `evolve` method for `StudentSubscribed` event. We decreased the numbers which we increased in the previous one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<7> The handler for the `StudentUnsubscribed` event is an exact opposite of the `evolve` method for `StudentSubscribed` event. We decrease the numbers that we increased in the previous one.
```

How do we ensure that we won't load events for every student and every course?
How do we limit our Consistency Boundary to only what is really needed to validate business rules?

> It's where the `EventCriteria` comes into play.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is where the `EventCriteria` comes into play.
```

We need all `StudentSubscribed` events for the given `courseId` and also all `StudentSubscribed` events for the given `studentId`.
The same applies to `StudentUnsubscribed` events.

Whereas, for example, with `StudentEnrolledFaculty` - we care about just one event for the given `studentId`; other students are not involved while processing this command, and there are no business rules between them.
The subscription story is different, because we have a limit of students per course and also a limit of courses per student.

Thanks to the Axon Framework's `EventCriteria` concept, we're able to define the events we'd like to load dynamically.
This is where the Dynamic Consistency Boundary shines.

[NOTE]
====
For Axon Framework 4 users:
Before we had to load all events for the given aggregate (from the event stream). We were defining the "tag" of events by using the `@TargetAggregateIdentifier` annotation.
Since Axon Framework 5, we can load events that are relevant for the given command using custom criteria (you choose event types and tags).

> You may think about that in such a way: before event could have just one tag—the aggregateId, but now we can have multiple tags for the same event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may think about it as follows: before, an event could have just one tag—the aggregateId. Now we can have multiple tags for any given event!
```

====

Here the situation is a bit more complicated, because we need to load events for two different entities - `Student` and `Course`.

> In a system based on Aggregates, you may load both and limit your accessibility - the risk of optimistic concurrency is higher, or implement a complex saga to orchestrate changes between those two entities - then you also need to duplicate the events and deal with eventual consistency.

Reviewer: I think this long sentence should also be broken up into smaller sentences.

Whereas in the domain experts' language, `StudentSubscribed` is just one fact, which influences rules around both `Student` and `Course`.

> As long as we're in a single bounded context and have all events in one storage, we can define our custom `EventCriteria` to shape our `State` which mixes properties for `Student` and `Course`!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As long as we're in a single bounded context and have all events in one storage, we can define our custom `EventCriteria` to shape our `State`, mixing properties from both `Student` and `Course`!
```

The operation will be also immediately consistent and transactional.

> If while executing the operation any event matching the same `EventCriteria` is stored, the operation will fail with an optimistic concurrency exception.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If while executing the command, any event matching the same `EventCriteria` is stored, the operation will fail with an optimistic concurrency exception.
```

            var studentId = id.studentId().raw();

            return EventCriteria.either(
                    EventCriteria.match()
                            .eventsOfTypes(
                                    CourseCreated.class.getName(),
                                    CourseCapacityChanged.class.getName(),
                                    StudentSubscribed.class.getName(),
                                    StudentUnsubscribed.class.getName()
                            ).withTags(Tag.of("courseId", courseId)), // <3>
                    EventCriteria.match()
                            .eventsOfTypes(
                                    StudentEnrolledFaculty.class.getName(),
                                    StudentSubscribed.class.getName(),
                                    StudentUnsubscribed.class.getName()
                            ).withTags(Tag.of("studentId", studentId))
            );
        }
    }

}
----
<1> The `@EventCriteriaBuilder` annotation marks the method as a criteria builder for the given entity. It gives you more flexibility than just using `tagKey` property on the `@EventSourcedEntity` annotation.

> <2> Thanks to the `SubscriptionId` which is composed of `courseId` and `studentId` we know the values of those tags we needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<2> Thanks to the `SubscriptionId`, which is composed of `courseId` and `studentId`, we know the values of those tags we needed.
```

> <3> As you may see at the highest level those `EventCriteria` are combined with `either` method, but when we define tags in `withTags` it means that the certain type of event requires all of them (there is an OR relation between event types, an AND relation between tags and OR between criteria).
> If we do `.withTags(Tag.of("courseId", courseId), Tag.of("studentId", studentId))` we will receive just subscription event of the given student for just one given course.
> It's not what we wanted here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<3> As you may see at the highest level that we combine `EventCriteria` with `either`. But, when we define tags through `withTags`, it means that a certain type of event requires all of them (there is an OR relation between event types, an AND relation between tags and OR between criteria).
Hence, if we do `.withTags(Tag.of("courseId", courseId), Tag.of("studentId", studentId))` we will only receive subscription events of the given student for one given course.
This is not what we want here.
```

So, we split `StudentSubscribed` and `StudentUnsubscribed` events into two separate criteria (one for student and one for course), because we need to load all events of those types for either `courseId` or `studentId`.

> It gives us better accessibility of our system - thanks to that, as you see there is no `CourseRenamed` event in our criteria, so the Faculty administrator is still able to rename the course in the same time while processing the `SubscribeStudent` command, because the `CourseRenamed` event doesn't match the criteria - it's not in our operation consistency boundary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It gives us better accessibility of our system - thanks to that, as you see there is no `CourseRenamed` event in our criteria, so the Faculty administrator is still able to rename the course in the same time while processing the `SubscribeStudent` command. Because the `CourseRenamed` event doesn't match the criteria, it's not in our operation's consistency boundary.
```

> In case of Aggregates, those operations may clash, or you need to introduce separated entity for the name if you want to avoid concurrency access issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case of Aggregates, these operations may clash, or you need to introduce a separate entity for the name to avoid concurrency access issues.
```

Our colleague Milan from AxonIQ (with our ex-colleague Sara) discuss those scenarios in the talk—we really encourage you to watch it link:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IgigmuHHchI[The Aggregate is dead. Long live the Aggregate! by Sara Pellegrini & Milan Savic @ Spring I/O 2023].

[NOTE]
====
Keep in mind it's beneficial to define events types in the criteria.
Technically you can just use `EventCriteria.match().eventsOfTypes(...)` and load all events for the given tag.
But in this case, you load more than needed, and it's possible to clash with other changes, which cause events that do not influence these certain business rules.
====

== Summing up

Let's summarize what we have done so far.
We've implemented the whole `SubscribeStudent` command handler using the DCB concept in practice.
It was easier than you expected, right?
If you're not sure if you followed the tutorial correctly, you can always check the code in the repository. The command handler code is here link:https://github.com/AxonIQ/university-demo/blob/master/src/main/java/io/axoniq/demo/university/faculty/write/subscribestudent/SubscribeStudentCommandHandler.java[SubscribeStudentCommandHandler].

> If you prefer to use different style (with multiple state classes - like `Course` and `Student` instead of just one) you may also compare the solution we have done with the code in the package link:https://github.com/AxonIQ/university-demo/tree/master/src/main/java/io/axoniq/demo/university/faculty/write/subscribestudentmulti[subscribestudentmulti].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you prefer to use a different style (with multiple state classes - like `Course` and `Student` instead of just one) you may also compare it with the solution we have done in the link:https://github.com/AxonIQ/university-demo/tree/master/src/main/java/io/axoniq/demo/university/faculty/write/subscribestudentmulti[subscribestudentmulti] package.
```

:navtitle: Feature: Subscribe Student
:reftext: Implementing the subscribe student feature

> 

Reviewer 2: The header here is missing, this causes the menu to not show the title when antora is built
